So far in this section of the course all of the probability distributions that we've been creating were
one dimensional.
They were based on one variable in this video.
You are going to see how to extend the probability distribution to two dimensional so this is called
a joint probability distribution.
It's when you are looking at data distributions over two separate variables and along the way in this
video you're also going to learn a little bit more about seaborne and a bit more about pandas including
importing data.
In this case text data so CSB or comma separated values data from the disk into python.
Using pandas.
So let's jump immediately into Python we are going to be using num pi.
Matt.
Plot lib and Seabourn and in the exercises we will also get to using pandas.
So what I'm going to do is start by creating a two dimensional distribution.
So I'm going to do that by creating two sets of variables or two variables of random numbers.
So let's add the first one to be just random numbers Gaussian distributed and then on the y axis I'm
actually going to set this to be very similar except this is going to be X squared.
So here we have our variable X and our variable Y.
And now the question is what is the joint probability distribution of x and y.
So what is the probability that a given data point will have some value within some range in X and also
in Y.
So to examine this we are going to plot a two dimensional histogram so hist to D.
So that's X come away and then I will specify the number of beans to be 30.
So let's see.
And then I'm gonna put an x axis label.
So the X axis label is going to be x.
So that's actually just the function x and then the y axis label is going to be X squared.
So I'll use a little bit of latex coating here.
So X karat too.
And let's see what this thing looks like.
So here we have our two dimensional distribution.
And actually it's really dominated by these small values here.
So I'm going to add another optional input to hist 2D and that is v Max for the maximum color.
And let's set it to 10 for example.
So this is starting to look better.
So how do you interpret this plot.
Well this is very similar to the histogram that we've been looking at before.
The main difference is that we have a separate histogram for each variable so you can see the distribution
over X and the distribution over X squared.
Now of course all these values are positive here or at least non negative because there is no value
for X squared.
That can possibly be negative.
And as you saw a couple of videos ago when we created probability distributions of those mathematical
functions X squared has a large concentration of values towards zero.
So in this case that's going to be on the bottom.
Now you remember when we were looking at the histogram of data just for X squared.
That plot looks something like this at this kind of exponential decay indicating that most values were
small close to zero.
And that's what you see going along the y axis here.
Now the thing is that there's actually three distributions that you can extract from this plot.
There's the distributions over the x axis the distributions over the y axis and the joint distribution
which is what you were looking at here.
So we can actually make this plot be a little clearer we can make this be more interpretable by also
plotting what's called the marginal distributions.
So that would be the distributions when ignoring one of the dimensions and to do that I'm going to switch
to seaborne so I'm going to write S and S for seaborne that joint plot and let's make a joint plot of
X comma Y and BLT that show and let's see what this looks like so what are we looking at here.
So each of these dots shows a data point on the x axis and on the y axis and what you see here on the
side and on top is the distribution.
It's called the marginal distributions over the two dimensions.
So this up here is the distribution over X which is the the function x.
So this would be the distribution completely ignoring variable Y.
And here on the side you see the distribution of Y completely ignoring X or marginal over x.
Okay.
So now I want to spend a moment making this plot look a little bit nicer.
So the first thing that I'm going to do is activate the seaborne visualization set parameters with S.A.
dot set.
So now you see it looks a little different it's the same data of course but the histogram looks different
here and you get this you know this sort of white grid here it looks a little bit nicer.
So this is a scatter plot because we see all the individual dots.
And if we look at the dock string or the help file for S.A. s Joint plot you can see that there's a
couple of different kinds of plots that we can generate.
So for example we can have Reg which stands for regression.
It'll plot a regression line and there's a couple of different options and KDE and hex.
I'm going to show you these three.
So Reg Katie and hex so let's start with Reg.
I'm going to say kind equals Reg again that stands for regression.
And what Seabourn is actually doing is computing the regression line between x and y and plotting that
regression line along with some uncertainty measure.
Now in this particular case for this example there isn't actually an interesting linear relationship
between X and Y.
And so the regression line in fact doesn't really make sense for this particular dataset but I just
wanted to illustrate it to you.
So then we have KDE e and this one draws a kernel density estimation.
So you see instead of seeing all the individual dots you see these ISO contours indicating the density
of the plots in different areas or the data in different areas and then also change the histogram to
be a kernel density estimation.
So it's a little bit smoother but it's still fundamentally the same data that's shown before.
Okay.
And then scatter.
But that is actually the default if you don't type anything.
I would also like to change the color of these so I'm going to add another optional input here to say
color equals and I'll specify RG b. I like to have a bit of red not so much green and quite a bit of
blue that makes for a very nice color I think now what would you do if you wanted to have a scatter
plot and a kernel density estimation.
Let's say you wanted both of these because you think that each of them looks nice.
So in seaborne you can add a method to the S.A. joint plot function that's called plot underscore joint.
And here I'm going to specify S.A. that K D E plot.
So now this is going to produce a kernel density estimation plot that gets plotted on top of the plot
that's already here.
And so now you see all the individual data points as a scatter plot and you see the density estimation
on top.
And I think the last thing I will do is add the x and y labels.
Let me go up here.
Copy and paste.
And there you go.
So now this graph and this graph show fundamentally the same thing it's the same data.
However I think you agree that this is not only a little bit nicer to look at.
It's also a little bit more informative in particular because we have the overlay of the individual
data points with the kernel density and we have these marginal histogram on top and on the side the
exercise for this video has three parts.
So first of all you want to import this file called data that CSB.
This data comes along in the zip file where you download all the code for this section of the course.
So import this data file and you can import using Python or using pandas.
I recommend pandas.
It's actually a little bit easier to read in a CSP file in pandas compared to just in like raw python.
And then you want to show a joint distribution and joint probability distribution along with the marginals.
So that's very similar to what we just did in the in python a few moments ago.
And then you will see when you look at these data there's gonna be some clusters and then basically
you just want to look at the plot and interpret the number of clusters that are in the data.
And this is just by visual inspection we're not going to be applying any machine learning techniques
or categorization or clustering algorithms.
So just based on your visual inspection determine the number of spatial clusters that are present in
the data.
Now I'm going to give you a hint for importing this data file.
So if you don't want the hint if you want to figure it out on your own then.
Now is your last chance to pause the video because here comes the hint.
So the hint is to use PD pendants dot read see V all right.
So now you can pause the video and now I'm going to switch to Python and show you my solution so let's
start with a new cell down here.
I'm going to import the data.
Let's call it data.
So this is going to be PD read C S Vs C STV.
Again this is the way to import a C S V file in pandas.
You can also do it in raw Python.
It requires several extra lines of code.
But if that was your preferred solution then of course that's totally fine.
So let's see the data file is called data.
That C S V and let's just immediately take a look at what this dataset looks like.
OK.
So there's already a problem here and I hope that you've figured out what this problem is.
So the real data is it looks basically like this.
So we have two columns of data.
However there are not actually seventy four rows.
In fact there are seventy five rows of data.
This is the first row of data and this function by default or erroneously I should say considered the
first row in data file to be the labels for the two columns.
So pandas interpreted this first column to have this label and the second column to have this label
which means we're actually losing one row in the data.
So let's see.
So therefore we can write header equals none and now we get just default header names of 0 and 1.
And I am going to specify that the names will be called X and Y.
Okay.
Now if you tried to run this and you get an error about the file not being found or Python was unable
to locate the file then it's probably the case that you were just in the wrong file.
So if you look at the address bar up here you will see the name of the folder where you are living on
your computer or on the server if you're working on Python online.
So as long as this file is in this folder then it should be readable.
All right.
So now we've successfully read in these data and now I'm just going to make a plot so S.A. that joint
plot.
And now we have to specify the columns in data that we want to draw.
The plot up.
So it's going to be data X and we call this like a dictionary data y and let's actually just draw it
like this and see how it looks and I'll get rid of this here.
Okay.
So already this is pretty interesting.
You can see all these dots and it's pretty clear that there are three clusters one two three clusters.
So that's kind of the end of this assignment.
I'd want to spend a few moments making this look a little bit nicer.
So instead of this being a scatter plot on its own I'm going to say kind equals KDE so I'm going to
make this a kernel density estimation.
So there you see the histogram is the marginal distributions and you see the ISO contours showing where
the clusters of the data are.
Now this is already pretty interesting from a machine learning perspective because when you look at
the marginal histogram you don't actually see that there are three separate clusters in this dataset.
So if I gave you these data and you just looked at histogram of x and y and you didn't actually look
at the plot of the data X by Y so there's joint probability distribution you would actually most likely
misinterpret the data.
You would probably come to the wrong conclusion about the data and that is an example of the importance
of visualizing data as much as possible.
OK.
So there's a couple more things I want to do here.
I want to show you the another optional input called levels and that shows that controls the number
of ISO contours.
So for example found right levels equals two.
Then you can see that we just get to ISO contours so let's see two is definitely too small.
We can also do 20.
I'm sure that's gonna be OK.
Doesn't look so bad actually.
But I think probably somewhere around 5 is a pretty good range.
I think that's pretty reasonable.
Okay.
But now I also want to see all the individual points.
So I'm going to write plot underscore joint and then S.A. start scatter plot.
So this is kind of the opposite of what I did up here where I first drew the scatter plot and then put
the kernel density estimation on top here.
I'm gonna draw the kernel density estimation and then the scatter plot on top.
So the dots on top of that and I think this looks pretty nice.
So I'm going to call this the successful completion of this exercise in this video.
You learned how to create and interpret two dimensional histogram is which can be normalized to probability
distributions and you also learned more about creating nice looking plots in seaborne and importing
data from the disk using pend us.